XI. THE NINE SITUATIONS

1. Sun Tzŭ said: The art of war recognises nine varieties of ground: (1) Dispersive ground; (2) facile ground; (3) contentious ground; (4) open ground; (5) ground of intersecting highways; (6) serious ground; (7) difficult ground; (8) hemmed-in ground; (9) desperate ground.

2. When a chieftain is fighting in his own territory, it is dispersive ground.

3. When he has penetrated into hostile territory, but to no great depth, it is facile ground.

4. Ground the possession of which imports great advantage to either side, is contentious ground.

5. Ground on which each side has liberty of movement is open ground.

6. Ground which forms the key to three contiguous states, so that he who occupies it first has most of the Empire at his command, is a ground of intersecting highways.

7. When an army has penetrated into the heart of a hostile country, leaving a number of fortified cities in its rear, it is serious ground.

8. Mountain forests, rugged steeps, marshes and fens, and all road which are hard to traverse: this is difficult ground.

9. Ground which is reached through narrow gorges, and from which we can only retire by tortuous paths, so that a small number of the enemy would suffice to crush a large body of our men: this is hemmed-in ground.

10. Ground on which we can only be saved from destruction by fighting without delay, is desperate ground.

11. On dispersive ground, therefore, fight not. On facile ground, halt not. On contentious ground, attack not.

12. On open ground, do not try to block the enemy's way. On the ground of intersecting highways, join hands with your allies. On serious ground, gather in plunder. On difficult ground, keep steadily on the march. On hemmed-in ground, resort to stratagem. On desperate ground, fight.

13. Those who were called skilful leaders of old knew how to drive a wedge between the enemy's front and rear; to prevent co-operation between his large and small divisions; to hinder the better troops from rescuing the poorer, and the officers from rallying their men.

14. When the enemy's men were scattered, they prevented them from concentrating; even when his forces were united, they managed to keep them in disorder.

15. When it was to their advantage, they made a forward move; when otherwise, they stopped still.

16. If asked how to cope with a great host of the enemy in orderly array and on the point of marching to attack, I should say: "Begin by seizing something which your opponent holds dear; then he will be amenable to your will."

17. Rapidity is the essence of war: take advantage of the enemy's unreadiness, make your way by unexpected routes, and attack unguarded spots.

18. The following are the principles to be observed by an invading force: The further you penetrate into a country, the greater will be the solidarity of your troops, and thus the defenders will not prevail against you.

19. Make forays in fertile country in order to supply your army with food.

20. Carefully study the well-being of your men, and do not overtax them. Concentrate your energy and hoard your strength. Keep your army continually on the move, and devise inscrutable plans.

21. Throw your soldiers into positions whence there is no escape, and they will prefer death to flight. If they will face death, there is nothing they may not achieve. Officers and men alike will put forth their uttermost strength.

22. Soldiers when in desperate straits lose the sense of fear. If there is no place of refuge, they will stand firm. If they are in hostile country, they will show a stubborn front. If there is no help for it, they will fight hard.

23. Thus, without waiting to be marshalled, the soldiers will be constantly on the qui vive; without waiting to be asked, they will do your will; without restrictions, they will be faithful; without giving orders, they can be trusted.

24. Prohibit the taking of omens, and do away with superstitious doubts. Then, until death itself comes, no calamity need be feared.

25. If our soldiers are not overburdened with money, it is not because they have a distaste for riches; if their lives are not unduly long, it is not because they are disinclined to longevity.

26. On the day they are ordered out to battle, your soldiers may weep, those sitting up bedewing their garments, and those lying down letting the tears run down their cheeks. But let them once be brought to bay, and they will display the courage of a Chu or a Kuei.

27. The skilful tactician may be likened to the shuai-jan. Now the shuai-jan is a snake that is found in the Ch'ang mountains. Strike at its head, and you will be attacked by its tail; strike at its tail, and you will be attacked by its head; strike at its middle, and you will be attacked by both head and tail.

28. Asked if an army can be made to imitate the shuai-jan, I should answer, Yes. For the men of Wu and the men of Yueh are enemies; yet if they are crossing a river in the same boat and are caught by a storm, they will come to each other's assistance just as the left hand helps the right.

29. Hence it is not enough to put one's trust in the tethering of horses, and the burying of chariot wheels in the ground.

30. The principle on which to manage an army is to set up one standard of courage which all must reach.

31. How to make the best of both strong and weak—that is a question involving the proper use of ground.

32. Thus the skilful general conducts his army just as though he were leading a single man, willy-nilly, by the hand.

33. It is the business of a general to be quiet and thus ensure secrecy; upright and just, and thus maintain order.

34. He must be able to mystify his officers and men by false reports and appearances, and thus keep them in total ignorance.

35. By altering his arrangements and changing his plans, he keeps the enemy without definite knowledge. By shifting his camp and taking circuitous routes, he prevents the enemy from anticipating his purpose.

36. At the critical moment, the leader of an army acts like one who has climbed up a height and then kicks away the ladder from behind him. He carries his men into the enemy's country before they have realised what is happening, and withdraws the means of retreat.

37. He burns his boats and breaks his cooking-pots; like a shepherd driving a flock of sheep, he drives his men this way and that, and none knows whither he is going.

38. To muster his host and bring it into danger—this may be termed the business of the general.

39. The nine varieties of ground, the expediency of contracting or expanding one's operations, and the human heart in its reaction to varying circumstances—these are matters which must be carefully studied.

40. The general principle applicable to an invading force is that the deeper you go, the greater the solidarity, and therefore the more effective your army becomes.

41. To make forays in fertile country is the correct strategy in serious ground.

42. Cross rivers quickly; do not linger.

43. This is the value of being in difficult ground.

44. This is what is meant by the local chieftain being the first to gain a position.

45. The art of being subtle and secretive! to the point of having no form; the art of being mysterious and impenetrable, to the point of making no sound—these are the qualities that enable the general to hold the fate of the enemy in his hands.

46. When Marquis Wu's troops were annihilated, he was found sitting in his chariot with his sword drawn and weeping. As to his losing the battle, anyone with eyes could see that he was to blame; but the reason of his tears was that the men who had gone into battle with him had not come back.

47. On the day of battle, be like a maiden; when the enemy opens the door, rush in like a startled rabbit. The enemy will be unable to resist you.

48. Sun Tzŭ said: The principles of the art of war are: First, measurement of space; second, estimation of quantities; third, calculations; fourth, balancing of chances; fifth, victory.

49. Space gives rise to measurement; measurement gives rise to quantities; quantities give rise to calculations; calculations give rise to balancing of chances; balancing of chances gives rise to victory.

50. A victorious army opposed to a routed one, is as a pound's weight placed in the scale against a single grain.

51. The onrush of a conquering force is like the bursting of pent-up waters into a chasm eight thousand feet deep.
