XII. THE ATTACK BY FIRE

1. Sun Tzŭ said: There are five ways of attacking with fire. The first is to burn soldiers in their camp; the second is to burn stores; the third is to burn baggage trains; the fourth is to burn arsenals and magazines; the fifth is to hurl dropping fire amongst the enemy.

2. In order to carry out an attack with fire, we must have means available; the material for raising fire should always be kept in readiness.

3. There is a proper season for making attacks with fire, and special days for starting a conflagration.

4. The proper season is when the weather is very dry; the special days are those when the moon is in the constellations of the Sieve, the Wall, the Wing or the Cross-bar; for these four are all days of rising wind.

5. In attacking with fire, one should be prepared to meet five possible developments:

6. When fire breaks out inside the enemy's camp, respond at once with an attack from without.

7. If there is an outbreak of fire, but the enemy's soldiers remain quiet, bide your time and do not attack.

8. When the force of the flames has reached its height, follow it up with an attack, if that is practicable; if not, stay where you are.

9. If it is possible to make an assault with fire from without, do not wait for it to break out within, but deliver your attack at a convenient time.

10. When you start a fire, be to windward of it. Do not attack from the leeward side.

11. A wind that rises in the daytime lasts long, but a night breeze soon falls.

12. In every army, the five developments connected with fire must be known, the movements of the stars calculated, and a watch kept for the proper days.

13. Hence those who use fire as an aid to the attack show intelligence; those who use water as an aid to the attack gain an accession of strength.

14. By means of water, an enemy may be intercepted, but not robbed of all his belongings.

15. With regard to night operations, there should be much use of signal-fires and drums, and in day fighting, mainly banners and flags.

16. Now, the changes of the five elements (nature) need not be of the same form; but the four seasons make way for each other in turn. There are short days and long; the moon has its periods of waning and waxing.

17. A kingdom that has once been destroyed can never come again into being; nor can the dead ever be brought back to life.

18. Hence the enlightened ruler is heedful, and the good general full of caution. This is the way to keep a country at peace and an army intact.

19. Hence the saying: The enlightened ruler lays his plans well ahead; the good general cultivates his resources.

20. Move only if there is a real advantage to be gained, and it is only worth while to use troops if a decisive victory is in sight. A prince should never put his troops in the field merely to gratify his own spleen; a general should never fight a battle simply out of pique. If it is to your advantage, make a forward move; if not, stay where you are.

21. Anger may in time change to gladness; vexation may be succeeded by content. But a kingdom that has once been destroyed can never come again into being; nor can the dead ever be brought back to life.
